INTRODUCTION

Weather is the instantaneous state of the atmosphere or sequence of the atmosphere with time, which can be defined as the condition of the atmosphere at any given
time and place. Climate, on the other hand is the average as well as variability of weather conditions prevailing in an area over a long period of time as given
in the guide book.

Nature is very precious gift from God to his dear little children. But human beings have been damaging it since few years. And it is also true that we are trying to
reduce. It is our duty to think and take positive steps to make that gift more valuable. India being a developing country has been trying to contribute in it but the
thing is all have to participate.

NCSC is one of the programs that are making attempts to spread the message of changing climate.

After thinking a lot and observing a lot we concluded that we must have to study the place which is affecting the clinage of our area most. We need to study the human
activities there which are responsible for it and to find solution we selected the place kadodara. It is the place where many industries are located. We think that
they are not taking suitable steps to reduce the affects of their waste to climate. By asking several people we got many points on which world need to think, need to find
different methods to do those activities so that they may not affect out climate negatively.

We have some ideas that can help to reduce the impact of human activities on climate. These are based on simple science and these ideas have arisen from innovative children's
minds. These are described in "solution to the problem".
Local peop;e have many such problems like noise while working in the factory, asthma, other eye problems because of dust particles, it will be helpful to them if something
ensure regular supply of light at night. For this we have to find answers of the following questions...

1. How our ideas will help local community?
2. What are the main problems faced by people living in industrial area?
3. What causes that problem?
4. What are the common effects of changed climate on health?
5. To which extent out ideas are applicable?

To find out the answer of these questions what we have done is as follows-

Local people of kadodara say:

1] - Many years ago climate of this area was not polluted, Gradually industrialists found this place suitable for their plans. Then they started dumping waste into environment
     and now it has completely changed. Dying mills are the major industries here and waste products from these mills are:
     waste water
     - waste water after dying process
     - steam after bleaching operation
     - Boiling blow down
     Land contamination
     - spillages and leakages from various waste water generating section
     - solid hazardous waste generation
     Noise pollution
     - noise of machines
     Radiation heat loss
2] - Diseases caused by chaged climate
     Due to high temperature - It is fact that if we work in high temperature for long period it affect our digestive system but when we tried to find we didn't get any case.
     May be because people didn't know much about it and they were not aware that something is wrong in their body?

     Secondly there were some cases of urinary bladder cancer.

     Due to dust particles in air- People living there have to breathe the contaminated air in which there are large amount of dust particles. This causes many respiratory
     problems like asthma. Eyes are alse affected by large amount of dust particles.

     They release waste water [ they filter it before releasing ] into water bodies. This may change temperature of water and can affect the reproductive cycle of the aquatic animals
     living in that water. This water goes and reach underground water table. People generally use underground water for everyday uses like for drinking, bathing and for various
     sanitary purposes.

3] - Soil pollution- Dust particles form a layer on the soil and reduces water holding capacity of that soil. They use to keep the fuel like coal in the open.
