SOLUTION TO THE PROBLEM

As we concluded from above that there are many waste products like waste, heat, sound emitted from industries. So what we thought
about this all and from our limited knowledge. We have tried to develop some plans which may help to solve the problems of
disposals.

Chimneys of the boilers evolves lots of gases like carbon dioxide, sulphur dioxide, sulphur oxide, sulphur trioxide. If smoke is
evolved in large amount turbine mount than wa can create high pressure and thus gases produced are first stored under high pressure
thus when gas is released apply the force on the turbine. As a result turbine starts to rotate and electricity can be produced
based on the laws of electromagnetic induction.

Dust particles are causing lots of problem to the people. For that we can have fountains at edge of the factories. The fountains
will help dust particles to settle down. Plants could be grown near the fountains. It will keep the surroundings cool, clean and
green.

Secondly we have observed that the embroidery section produces lots of noise. Large amount of sound energy is being
produced by machines and released by machines but it was totally being wasted.

We can convert that sound energy into any other usable form like electric energy. There should be reflectors which reflect
the sound and collect it at single place.

We are facing the problem of electricity shortage. We have a plan by which we can produce light energy without any cost.

We need to suspend huge hydrogen bubble in the air. Solar panels will be there at the top of the balloon which will trap
the solar energy. Then it will convert solar energy into electrical energy and by using that energy lights can be lit at
the night or whenever needed.

Balloon will be filled with the hydrogen so that it can go up in the air. It should be strong enough to hold the solar
panels on it. At its upper side panels will be there which will trap heat at the day time. Heat will be then converted into
electrical energy and will be stored. At the night time it will give light to the whole area of near about 2-3 km square km.

Mirror should be arranged near the houses in such a way that the light will reflect in the house.
